---
layout: post
author: Koen
category: Filosofie
tags: Filosofie
title: "Book summary: Peter Singer's Famine, Affluence and Morality"
teaser: "A short and concise summary of the essay's main premise, possible objections to it, and Singer's rebuttal."
---

This is my summary of Peter Singer's 1971 essay; Famine, Affluence and Morality. It has brought forth movements like <a target="_blank" href="https://www.effectivealtruism.org/">Effective Altruism</a> and is widely regarded as an important piece of Western ethical thinking. You can read the original essay <a target="_blank" href="https://personal.lse.ac.uk/ROBERT49/teaching/mm/articles/Singer_1972Famine.pdf">here</a>. <!--more-->

### The main premise
The essay was inspired by the famine of regufees that fled after the Bangladesh Liberation War. While millions of people were starving, affluent governments did very little to prevent this. Singer uses this situation as a model to argue that many rich countries' responses to catastrophes are unjustifiable. I have briefly summarized the premises of his reasoning below.

<div class='text-box' markdown="block">

1. Dying of starvation is bad.
    <br><br>

2. If you are able to prevent something bad from happening, without sacrificing anything of comparable moral importance, you ought to do it. 

    <details>
	<summary><span class="information"></span>Expand</summary>
        <div class="details-content">
	    <p>You must prevent something bad from happening, unless that would mean causing something comparably bad to happen, or if it would fail to cause something good of comparable weight.</p>
        </div>
    </details>
    <br>

3. We <b>are</b> able to prevent the bad thing, without sacrificying anything of comparable moral importance or significance.

    <details>
	<summary><span class="information"></span>Expand</summary>
        <div class="details-content">
	    <p>Lack of food, shelter and medicine can be solved by donating to charity. Many people in affluent Western nations would not need to sacrifice anything important. We can do without the latest electronics, expensive clothing or jewelry if that means preventing someone dying from starvation.</p>
        </div>
    </details>
    <br>
4. We ought to give to charity maximally, or at least way much more than we do now.
<br><br>
</div>



### The following analogy is right on the money. 

<blockquote>"If I am walking past a shallow pond and see a child drowning in it, I ought to wade in and pull the child out. This will mean getting my clothes muddy, but this is insignificant, while the death of the child would presumably be a very bad thing."</blockquote>

The <b>take away</b> is that it's just as bad to buy new clothes while a child anywhere in the world is dying of starvation. <i>There is no difference</i>. 

### Counter arguments + objections.
I have summarized some common objections you might have, and Singer's answer to them. 

Even though, <i>psychologically</i> speaking, we may be less inclined to help someone if they live far away, that is not a valid objection if you accept any principle of impartiality, univeralizability or equality. The most widespread contemporary example of such a principe is <a target="_blank" href="https://www.un.org/en/universal-declaration-human-rights/index.html">The Universal Declaration of Human Rights</a>.

It does not matter, either, whether other people are present who are also able to help. Imagine you see a child drowning in a pond in a park full of people, does that excuse you from acting?

Many people will never pay their fair share, but that does not excuse you from paying <i>more than your fair share</i>. Imagine you're at the pond again. This time, <i>fifty</i> children are drowning at the same time. You happen to be at a barbecue party with exactly fifty guests. Half of the guests prefer staying clean and dry. Would you comfortably let 25 children <i>drown and die</i>, knowning you have paid your fair share? 

You may be wondering why you would need to give away money you worked hard for, but the same amount of effort would lead you to be dirt poor in many other parts of the world. Consider the following quote by famous investor Warren Buffet: 

<blockquote>"If you stick me down in the middle of Bangladesh or Peru, you'l find out how much this talent is going to produce in the wrong kind of soil."</blockquote>

Most of your wealth is not attributable to your efforts, but rather to your place of birth. 